Chicago variant axes and parity fix (#1154)
citum/citum-core: docs/specs/CHICAGO_VARIANT_AXES.md

(lines 47–54), rendering "Ibid." for every immediate repeat. Its own stated
CSL source — `diffs/chicago-notes.diff`, matching the
`csl-id: http://www.zotero.org/styles/chicago-notes` recorded in the
style's own `source:` metadata — keeps the plain
`citation-notes-full-subsequent-author-title` macro unchanged, i.e. the CSL
style this was migrated from never renders "Ibid." CMOS18 §13.37 (§12.77 for
in-text citations) confirms this is not an arbitrary default: Chicago's own
stated preference is the shortened author-title form over "ibid.", in part
because "ibid." is only correct when it refers to the work cited in the
immediately preceding note — its correctness depends on adjacency in a way
the shortened form's does not — and it saves no space over the shortened
form. "Ibid." is a permitted alternative if used consistently, not Chicago's
default. Both the migration source and Chicago's own guidance point the same
direction: `chicago-notes-18th.yaml` should render the shortened form for
immediate repeats, the same as it already does for every other subsequent
citation, not "Ibid." The actual fix — removing or gating the block — is

> tracked as bean `csl26-adka`, not carried in this spec.

Author: ```suggestion
This comparison surfaced a defect in how Citum Chicago styles currently 
handle subsequent citations, which is recorded in bean `csl26-adka`.
```

### The axis map

Each of the 74 Chicago `.diff` files, once `<info>` metadata is set aside,
reduces to a combination of independent variation axes. Nine axes account
for the corpus:

| # | Axis | CSL values | Citum mechanism |
|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | Citation system | full notes-and-bibliography, notes-only, shortened notes-and-bibliography, author-date, in-text (Bluebook-style), in-text shortened(-title) | **Not something a child style can add** — each value is a distinct citation grammar with its own style document, not a variant of a shared one. Citum has three of the six today: notes-only (`chicago-notes-18th.yaml`), shortened notes-and-bibliography (`chicago-shortened-notes-bibliography-core.yaml`), and author-date (`chicago-author-date-18th.yaml`). Missing: full notes-and-bibliography — the CSL template's own default — and the two in-text forms. See Scope. |

> | 2 | Subsequent-note form | full author-title (template default), ibid, author-only, title-only | `citation.subsequent` / `citation.ibid` blocks — see worked example above. These carry their own template content, so a child expressing this axis needs a structural patch, not a plain option |

Author: the "worked" example doesn't include the Citum analog.

template patch, because CSL's diffs at those axes touch specific rendered
components for specific reference types. Axis 1 is out of scope: it is
new-style authoring work, not something an `extends:` child can add, because
each value is a genuinely different citation grammar, not a delta on a
shared one. Axis 7 mixes option and structural changes closely enough that
it is also out of scope for a first pass.

### Two gaps found while checking axis coverage

Both are recorded as evidence from checking real code paths against real
diff content, not as change proposals. Per the project's schema-change
policy, either would need its own docs-first spec PR before any
implementation.

**Gap A — `links:` config controls hyperlinking, not text rendering.**
`LinksConfig.url` / `LinksConfig.doi`
(`crates/citum-schema-style/src/options/mod.rs:605-655`) feed
`resolve_effective_url`
(`crates/citum-engine/src/values/variable.rs:433-455`), which decides
whether a rendered component becomes a clickable link. They do not control
whether the URL or DOI text renders at all. Axis 3 (`-no-url`) needs the
text suppressed, not just unlinked, so reproducing it needs a `remove:`

> operation at every reference type that renders `{variable: url}` or

Author: I think this warrants a config option. I'm just not ATM certain how best to handle that.

`{variable: doi}` — `chicago-author-date-18th.yaml` alone has such sites at
lines 258, 285, 303, 399–400, 478, 512, 531, 565, 600, 653, 681–682, 707,
724, and more.

> **Gap B — the style-wide fallback template cannot be structurally patched.**

Author: is this a necessary limitation or accidental? If, as I assume, the latter, we should fix that; no?

Every style has one fallback bibliography template used for any reference
type that has no template of its own. That field, `BibliographySpec.template`
(`crates/citum-schema-style/src/style/sections/bibliography.rs:40`), is a
plain list of components, not the patchable kind — `modify`/`remove`/`add`
only work on a per-reference-type template, not this style-wide one. Under
`extends:` it is whole-replace only, confirmed by
`test_explicit_null_clears_bibliography_template`
(`crates/citum-schema-style/tests/bdd_inheritance.rs:448`). This matters for
axis 3 concretely: `chicago-author-date-18th.yaml`'s own fallback
bibliography template renders `variable: doi` and `variable: url`
unconditionally as its final two components (lines 1041–1043). A child style
reproducing `-no-url` cannot reach those two sites by patching; the only way
to change them today is to copy the entire 41-line fallback template into
the child, which then stops tracking future changes to the parent's
version.

### Portfolio tier

> If and when any of these axes are implemented as actual Citum styles,

Author: this spec should propose which would be sensible to add
